JUDY WOODRUFF: The Tony Awards
are this Sunday, and one of the
Broadway shows nominated for
best play is "Oslo."
It's a drama that takes a deeper
look at what went into the
historical Middle East peace
accords and their
relevance today.
Jeffrey Brown has the
story from New York.
JEFFREY BROWN: The world
saw this, the historic
1993 handshake between
Israeli Prime Minister
Yitzhak Rabin and PLO leader
Yasser Arafat, brought together
at the White House by President
Bill Clinton.
What we didn't see was this:
ACTOR: You will achieve nothing
because your negotiating
model is fundamentally flawed.
JEFFREY BROWN: The nine
months behind-the-scenes
secret negotiations
that led up to the Oslo
accords.
ACTOR: This is our chance
to make a difference.
JEFFREY BROWN: In the play
"Oslo," playwright J.T. Rogers
has taken real people and events
and, with dramatic license,
imagined his way into history.
J.T.
ROGERS, Playwright,
"Oslo": Sneaking into
the royal households in
Norway, the Palestine
Liberation Organization
illegally meeting with Israelis,
drinking together, talking
about their children in the
middle of winter, and you think,
as a storyteller, that's manna
from heaven.
ACTRESS: A million Palestinians,
most of them without regular
electricity or water, crammed
into an area 25 miles long,
but only a few miles wide.
JEFFREY BROWN: Roger's way in
was through the little-known
behind-the-scenes role of
a Norwegian couple,
social scientist Terje
Rod-Larsen played by
Jefferson Mays, and diplomat
Mona Juul played
by Jennifer Ehle.
They served as facilitators in
a series of high-stakes, highly
secret talks between Israelis
and Palestinians.
ACTRESS: There, in that
moment, for us, it began.
JEFFREY BROWN: The real Mona
Juul is now Norway's ambassador
to the United Kingdom.
Her husband, the real
Terje Rod-Larsen, now
heads the International
Peace Institute and
continues to work on various
crises around the world.
He joined us in New York on
stage recently at Lincoln Center
Theater, where Oslo is being
performed.
TERJE ROD-LARSEN, International
Peace Institute: Just a handful
of people knew about what was
happening on the Palestinian,
Israeli and the Norwegian side.
I think most people had the
impression at the time that
this was something which was
very quickly concocted in the
White House, and not something
which was created laboriously,
seven days a week, 24
hours over nine months.
JEFFREY BROWN: Does it capture
the art of negotiating and
of your role pulling together
the negotiations?
TERJE ROD-LARSEN: Yes, I think
it does, actually, because we
defined very strictly our role
to be the facilitator of the
talks and the go-between between
the parties, and basically
telling the parties,
it's your problems.
You have to find
a solution to it.
It's not our job.
It's your job.
JEFFREY BROWN: We watch the
face-off between Ahmed Qurei and
Uri Savir, the top Palestinian
and Israeli negotiators,
played by Anthony Azizi
and Michael Aronov.
ACTOR: In my country, we see
you as terrorists and murderers
who wish to drive us into the
sea.
ACTOR: In my country, we see
you as a savage nation whose
army shoots our children for
sport!
JEFFREY BROWN: Over time,
the two slowly get to know
and respect one another.
ACTOR: Thank you.
I admire your passion.
JEFFREY BROWN: The so-called
Oslo accords agreed to by
the real negotiators included
the first formal mutual
recognition between Israel and
the PLO, and set the guidelines
of what to this day is referred
to as the peace process.
In the play, the two Norwegians,
their actions at times secret
even from their own government,
keep the talks going.
And under director Bartlett
Sher, the actors literally keep
the play moving along, 60 scenes
through several cities
all on one stage set.
JEFFERSON MAYS, Actor:
Welcome to backstage
at the Vivian Beaumont.
JEFFREY BROWN: I spoke to
Jefferson Mays and Jennifer Ehle
before a recent performance.
JEFFERSON MAYS: Terje Rod-Larsen
came in to speak to the company
about the double, sometimes
triple game of diplomacy.
And when he was talking
about it, it struck me
as being very theatrical.
And the diplomats are as much...
JEFFREY BROWN: Really, not
far from what you do, huh?
TERJE ROD-LARSEN: No, no.
There were diplomats.
A good diplomat is, I think,
very much like a good actor,
in that extremely sensitivity
to the other people in the
room, and is called upon to
play-act at certain points.
JENNIFER EHLE, Actress: It has
an element of a spy thriller.
I think people come in sometimes
thinking, I don't know what
I'm going to see, three
hours of a historical
political drama.
And -- but it's got a sort of
binge-watch sort of hook that
gets in you, and you really
just want to keep going.
JEFFERSON MAYS: You said
every character in this
play speaks their subtext.
There is no subtext.
JENNIFER EHLE:
It is about ideas.
It's about facts and it's
about narrative, an incredible
narrative drive, when you have
characters who are only
saying exactly what they mean.
JEFFERSON MAYS: I will
tell you a secret.
I was nervous at first to meet
those two, first members of
the PLO I had ever been face
to face with.
They're not the demons
I was expecting.
JEFFREY BROWN: An agreement and
great hope, but it didn't last.
The following years brought
more suffering, death and enmity
that continue to this day.
But Terje Rod-Larsen,
the ever-optimistic
peace negotiator, says
the Oslo accords did
have a lasting impact,
including the establishment
of the Palestinian
Authority, a peace between
Israel and Jordan that
has held, and more.
TERJE ROD-LARSEN: What we are
seeing today is difficult, but
without these institutions,
it would have been gangland
and complete chaos today.
So it has benefited
Palestinian and Israelis alike.
When President Trump visited
the Palestinians, he visited
the Palestinian president, which
springs out of the Oslo accords.
If he brings the parties
together again, a
premise for any talk has
to be the only signed
agreements which are there,
which are the Oslo accords.
JEFFREY BROWN: As for
"Oslo" the play taking
on such world-shaking
history, playwright
J.T. Rogers cited a
pretty good precedent.
J.T.
ROGERS: Shakespeare's plays
are entertaining and bawdy and
sexy and politics and life and
death, and he's pretty good.
(LAUGHTER)
J.T.
ROGERS: I think that -- I think
it's odd to me that current
events or larger political
things are not approached more
in the American theater, only
because it's such great red
meat for us; 1,200 people a
night sit here like around a
campfire and hear the same story
and ask themselves
the same questions.
And that's -- only the
theater can do that, no TV,
no Netflix, only the theater.
ACTOR: During the demonstration
in support of the Oslo
accords, Prime Minister Yitzhak
Rabin is assassinated.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Oslo" received
seven Tony nominations in
all, including for its two
lead actors and as
the year's best play.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown at Lincoln
Center Theater in New York.